Z/OS isn't the only operating system
you'll find in an enterprise environment.
Over the years, Unix has also become
widely used in a variety of industries.
It was so popular that a bunch of people
who wanted their own version of Unix went
out and made Linux.
Now, the evolution of Unix and the history
of Linux is pretty interesting, and
it's a fun research
rabbit hole to go down.
But the guys behind the camera
are giving me a look right now, so
I better get back on topic.
Today, Linux is everywhere, but
before Linux really took off,
people in mainframe shops really
wanted a way to use Unix.
So the operating system was enhanced
with Unix Systems Services, or USS.
Now, point of clarification, USS is not
a virtual or an emulated operating system.
It's an implementation
of a Unix environment.
So you can use commands like LS,
GREP, CAT, and MKDIR, and
you can even write and
run shell scripts without leaving z/OS.
Pretty neat trick.
And again, because it's an implementation,
it's using the same APIs behind
the scenes as z/OS does.
So it's not like going into USS gobbles
up another operating system's worth of
resources, and it's not just there in
case you feel like typing Unix commands.
For some z/OS middleware, you'll find
installation, configuration, and
automation utilities
implemented using USS.
And for someone with a Unix,
Linux background, like myself,
I like being able to script and
hack away at shell scripts.
Before we move on, here's an easy one,
just to make sure we're
all good on the basics.
Fill in the blank.
Unix Systems Services on z/OS is a what?
Implementation, virtual operating system,
hypervisor, or a Linux kernel module?
I hope you picked implementation, and
I'm going to keep driving that point home
because it's important to remember that
USS is just that, an implementation.
It's not a separate operating system,
or a virtualized operating system, or
a remote system, or anything like that.
Okay, now,
there's two main ways of driving USS.
The first is the interactive mode, which
you can get to with the TSO command OMVS.
That gives you a shell, which is how
you can enter commands and see output.
You can also use the I shell, which gives
you a panel driven interface into USS.
Behind the scenes,
it's all the same API, so
it really comes down to a matter of taste.
Even between z/OS and USS, it's not
an all one or the other type thing.
You can have one
interacting with the other.
For example, you can move files
from one environment to the other.
You can issue TSO commands
from the shell command line.
You can interact with Unix
files through the TSO commands.
You can even write JCL scripts
that include shell commands.
It's all intertwined.
Here's what the OMVS shell looks like.
There's a command line, there's the
function keys, and over here on the right,
the status indicator.
The status indicator will go back and
forth between input and
running, depending on if it's waiting for
you or you're waiting for it.
Working with directories and files is one
of the first things you'll need to do in
Unix, and there's a whole lot of commands
that you use to make that happen.
When you want to make a directory,
which is just another word for folder,
use MKDIR, M-K-D-I-R,
short for make directory.
Then CD is used to change the directory.
So after you've made a directory,
you can use CD to go into it.
And then you can use LS, the list command,
to look around that directory.
And if you want to move files back and
forth between a Unix file system and
z/OS, then check out the OPUT and
OGET commands.
That's basically the file system
structure of a Unix system.
You've got the file system, and you can
fill it with files and directories.
And within those directories,
you can put even more files and
directories, and so on.
And a file can be something
that you can read.
It can also be an executable program.
And there's other types of things that
you can put in a directory as well, but
files and
folders is the main name of the game.
Now, I could stand here and
list Unix commands for hours, but
I don't think that would be a good
use of either of our times.
Suffice to say, lots of commands.
And you won't find every command that you
would expect to find on a Linux system,
but it's still a good amount.
And if you really want to run Linux, there
are plenty of ways of running Linux on.
Unix Systems Services can use a type
of file system called the ZFS.
And one interesting thing about ZFS
is that it's sysplex-aware, and
you'll learn a little bit more about that
from my friend Louisa in a few minutes.
You can also mount a file
system over a network.
This is called NFS, or
network file system.
These network file systems can
be mainframe to mainframe, or
even mainframe to desktop,
or desktop to mainframe.
NFS is the commonality that
makes all of that possible.
And lastly, there's the TFS.
This is the temporary file system.
It's an in-memory physical file system.
And as the name suggests,
it's a good place for
writing up files that you only need for
a short amount of time.
If you need those files to be
there tomorrow or next week,
it's probably a good idea to make sure
those get copied somewhere more permanent
when you're done for the day.
And since we're done for
the day, let's close this up and
get on to the next topic.